KEP-5027 + 5055: DRA: admin-controlled device attributes + taints (#5034)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/5055-device-taints-and-tolerations/README.md

avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

With Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA), DRA drivers publish information about
the devices that they manage in ResourceSlices. This information is used by the
scheduler when selecting devices for user requests in ResourceClaims.

With this KEP, DRA drivers can mark devices as tainted such that they won't be
used for scheduling new pods. In addition, pods already running with access to
a tainted device can be stopped automatically. Cluster administrators can do
the same by creating a

> [ResourceSliceOverride](../5027-dra-admin-controlled-device-attributes] with a

Author: Fixed.

check its policy configuration and decide to take devices offline by creating
a ResourceSliceOverride with a taint for affected devices.

### Risks and Mitigations

A device can be identified by its names (`<driver name>/<pool name>/<device
name>`) and/or by its attributes (for example, a unique ID). It was a conscious
decision for core DRA to not require that the name is tied to one particular
hardware instance to support hot-swapping. Admins might favor using the names
whereas health monitoring might prefer to be specific and use a vendor-defined
unique ID. Both are supported, which creates additional complexity.

Without a kubectl extension similar to `kubectl taint nodes` the user
experience for admins will be a bit challenging. They need to decide how to
identify the device (by name or with a CEL expression), manually create a
ResourceSliceOverride with a unique name, then remember to remove that
ResourceSliceOverride again. For beta, support in `kubectl` for common
operations may be needed.

## Design Details

The feature is following the approach and APIs taken for node taints and
applies them to devices. A new controller watches tainted devices and deletes

> pods using them unless they tolerate the device taint, similar to the

Reviewer: Operators like training operator (https://github.com/kubeflow/training-operator) can spawn more pods when pods are deleted, will pod deletion cause pending pods in the cluster?

Reviewer: Pods can also have finalizers set by different operators

Author: A finalizer doesn't prevent stopping the containers. As soon as the kubelet sees a pod with DeletionTimestamp, it will stop it. That's sufficient for this KEP.

The pod object then remains in the API server with a final "stopped and deleted" state. That in turn is sufficient for DRA to deallocated claims, so this also doesn't block devices.

Reviewer: Thanks. If an operator pod spawns the next pod referencing the same claim, will such a claim be deallocated?

Reviewer 2: _Hi, I'm one of this KEP authors._

In this design, Taints will be defined per device in ResourceSlice(Override). Tolerations will be declared per device in ResourClaim.

> If an operator pod spawns the next pod referencing the same claim, will such a claim be deallocated?

Thus, if multiple pods shared ResourceClaims and some allocated devices in them are tainted, and the claim can not tolerate the taints, yes, all the pods will be deleted and the resource claim will be unallocated.

Author: > A finalizer doesn't prevent stopping the containers. ...

Added also as text in the KEP.

Reviewer: Thanks @everpeace. this may be good for workloads that have all-or-nothing semantics (e.g., AI workloads); on the downside, independent workloads consuming a single claim will have a hit even if one of the independent pods crashes. is my understanding correct?

Reviewer 2: > independent workloads consuming a single claim will have a hit even if one of the independent pods crashes. is my understanding correct?

Yes, you're correct. But, I don't think it's downside.

IF multiple pods shared the same ResourceClaim and the device allocated the devices to the claim was tainted(effect=NoExecute), I think it's natural to delete all the pods using the ResourceClaim because the claim can not tolerate the taints(effect=NoExecute).

Author: > independent workloads consuming a single claim will have a hit even if one of the independent pods crashes

A pod crashing seems unrelated to me. It doesn't cause the claim to get tainted, so other pods sharing the claim are not affected.

```

Taint has the exact same fields as a v1.Taint, but the description is a bit
different. In particular, PreferNoSchedule is not valid.

As with node taints, the key is typically a short string. The meaning of the value
depends on the key. It is allowed to be longer. The core v1 API does not impose
length limitations for these fields. The `resource.k8s.io` API does.

Tolerations get added to a DeviceRequest:

```Go
type DeviceRequest struct {
    ...

    // If specified, the request's tolerations.
    //
    // Tolerations for NoSchedule are required to allocate a
    // device which has a taint with that effect. The same applies
    // to NoExecute.
    //
    // In addition, should any of the allocated devices get tainted
    // with NoExecute after allocation and that effect is not tolerated,
    // then all pods consuming the ResourceClaim get deleted to evict
    // them. The scheduler will not let new pods reserve the claim while
    // it has these tainted devices. Once all pods are evicted, the
    // claim will get deallocated.
    //
	// +optional
	// +listType=atomic
	Tolerations []Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,22,opt,name=tolerations"`
}

> // The ResourceClaim this Toleration is attached to tolerates any taint that matches

Reviewer: s/tolerates/tolerate

Author: Thanks, fixed.

marked as `provisional` is a working document and subject to change. You can
denote sections that are under active debate as follows:

```
<<[UNRESOLVED optional short context or usernames ]>>
Stuff that is being argued.
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

When editing KEPS, aim for tightly-scoped, single-topic PRs to keep discussions
focused. If you disagree with what is already in a document, open a new PR
with suggested changes.

One KEP corresponds to one "feature" or "enhancement" for its whole lifecycle.
You do not need a new KEP to move from beta to GA, for example. If
new details emerge that belong in the KEP, edit the KEP. Once a feature has become
"implemented", major changes should get new KEPs.

The canonical place for the latest set of instructions (and the likely source
of this file) is [here](/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md).

**Note:** Any PRs to move a KEP to `implementable`, or significant changes once
it is marked `implementable`, must be approved by each of the KEP approvers.
If none of those approvers are still appropriate, then changes to that list
should be approved by the remaining approvers and/or the owning SIG (or
SIG Architecture for cross-cutting KEPs).
-->

> # KEP-NNNN: Your short, descriptive title

Author: Done.

avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

With Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA), DRA drivers publish information about
the devices that they manage in ResourceSlices. This information is used by the
scheduler when selecting devices for user requests in ResourceClaims.

With this KEP, DRA drivers can mark devices as tainted such that they won't be
used for scheduling new pods. In addition, pods already running with access to
a tainted device can be stopped automatically. Cluster administrators can do
the same by creating a

> [ResourceSliceOverride](../5027-dra-admin-controlled-device-attributes) with a

Author: Fixed.

taint.

Users can decide to ignore specific taints by adding tolerations to their
ResourceClaim.

## Motivation

### Goals

- Enable taking devices offline for maintenance while still allowing tests pods
  to request and use those devices. Being able to do this one device at a time
  minimizes service level disruption.

- Enable users to decide whether they want to keep running a workload in a degraded
  mode while a device is unhealthy or prefer to get pods rescheduled.

### Non-Goals

> - Not part of the plan for alpha: developing a kubectl command for tainting devices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Not part of the plan for alpha: developing a kubectl command for managing device taints.
```
(Managing; listing, adding, removing taints.)

Author: Thanks, changed.

ResourceSliceOverride again. For beta, support in `kubectl` for common
operations may be needed.

## Design Details

The feature is following the approach and APIs taken for node taints and
applies them to devices. A new controller watches tainted devices and deletes
pods using them unless they tolerate the device taint, similar to the
[taint-eviction-controller](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/32130691a4cb8a1034b999341c40e48d197f5465/pkg/controller/tainteviction/taint_eviction.go#L81-L83). A pod which is running or has finalizers will not get removed
immediately. Instead, the `DeletionTimestamp` gets set. That's okay for
the purpose of this KEP:
- The kubelet will stop any running containers and mark the pod as completed.
- The ResourceClaim controller will remove such a completed pod from the claim's
  `ReservedFor` and deallocate the claim once it has no consumers.

Taints are cumulative as long as the key and effect pairs are different:
- Taints defined by an admin in a ResourceSliceOverride get added to the
  set of taints defined by the DRA driver in a ResourceSlice.
- Taints with the same key and effect get overwritten, using the same

>   precedence as for attributes.

Author: Maybe? So the goal is to let the driver set a taint and then the admin decides that "no, this this taint shouldn't really taint the device"?

Let's see what an API for that could look like... What if we allowed an effect called "None"? Then a driver can publish a taint `{Key: dra.example.com/temperature, Value: 200, Effect: NoExecute}` and an admin can replace that with `{Key: dra.example.com/temperature, Value: 0, Effect: None}`. 

The scheduler and eviction controller ignore such taints with "no effect". The difference is that `Effect: None` replaces other taints with the same key during patching, instead of adding the taint to the set.

I'm not sure whether it makes sense, but I would also allow such entries in a ResourceSlice.

>   precedence as for attributes.

Reviewer 3: In general, I think actors on the taints should act only on their own taints, but naturally they should be able to remove those taints when they are not relevant any more.

Eg. after admin has finished upgrading the device firmware, and verified its working with a test pod tolerating the `FirmwareUpgrade` taint, he should be able to remove that taint so that other pods can again be scheduled on the upgraded device.

>   precedence as for attributes.

Author: The comment here is about ResourceSlicePatch and how it relates to taints in the ResourceSlice ("cumulative").

Of course each actor can and should remove their own taint. That's so normal, I didn't even bother mentioning that in the KEP :sweat_smile: Should I?

So do we not need the ability for an admin to modify some device taint set by the driver?

>   precedence as for attributes.

Reviewer 3: If driver has not set any taint yet, how k8s would know that admin patches a taint that  driver is "supposed" to manage?  Or was your question about admin masking out ("removing") a taint set by the driver?

I would assume allowing these would be simpler.  It would be nice if (some future) k8s tool for setting device taints would give a warning if driver has already set the specified taint, but I think its fine to allow it (-force).

Disallowing it would be fine too though.  If driver adds taint that admin does not care about, admin could always use taint toleration.   And maybe drivers could include options for disabling tainting, in case admin wants something else to handle that.

>   precedence as for attributes.

Author: > Or was your question about admin masking out ("removing") a taint set by the driver?

This thread here is about admins deleting taints set be a driver. The way the API is defined right now, an admin can add its own taint, but they cannot remove a taint set by a driver ("cumulative"). If we want to allow that, we need a special API for it. https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5034#discussion_r1937627730 is an attempt to define such an API.

// any claim and, through the claim, to pods that do not tolerate
// the Taint.
type Taint struct {
    // The taint key to be applied to a device.
    // Must be a label name.
    //
    // +required
    Key string

    // The taint value corresponding to the taint key.
    // Must be a label value.
    //
    // +optional
    Value string

    // The effect of the taint on claims and pods that do not tolerate the taint.
    // Valid effects are NoSchedule and NoExecute. PreferNoSchedule as used for
    // nodes is not valid here.
    //
    // +required
    Effect TaintEffect

    // ^^^^
    //
    // Implementing PreferNoSchedule would depend on a scoring solution for DRA.
    // It might get added as part of that.

    // TimeAdded represents the time at which the taint was added.
    // It is only written for NoExecute taints.
    //
    // +optional
    TimeAdded *metav1.Time
}
```

Taint has the exact same fields as a v1.Taint, but the description is a bit
different. In particular, PreferNoSchedule is not valid.

As with node taints, the key is typically a short string. The meaning of the value
depends on the key. It is allowed to be longer. The core v1 API does not impose

> length limitations for these fields. The `resource.k8s.io` API does.

Author: I was wrong and already removed this: the core API uses the validation for label names and keys and thus has length limits. They are just not documented specifically for the taint API.

I think that makes sense because defining "label name" and "label key" in all APIs that use them would be very repetitive. Therefore I have done the same here and only said that the strings must be label names and keys.

What is missing in the KEP is a specification of how many taints per device and patch are allowed. I think each taint is relatively small compared to the potentially large attributes, so how about we allow 16?

> length limitations for these fields. The `resource.k8s.io` API does.

Reviewer 3: While taints may differ between devices, I do not see single device having that many different taints.  Possibly few error metric taints from driver, couple of admin taints and potentially several metric related taints.  If device collects half a dozen taints before it gets decommissioned, that seems rather problematic device to keep in use...

It's possible that taint names change with time though, and some devices in large & old clusters could have eventually collected set of taints with obsolete names.  Such things should not prevent device getting relevant taints.  16 should be way more that enough for that though.

> length limitations for these fields. The `resource.k8s.io` API does.

Author: I agree that a few (3-4 at most) seems likely, perhaps even just one. 16 is meant to provide some buffer for unexpected usages.

    // it has these tainted devices. Once all pods are evicted, the
    // claim will get deallocated.
    //
	// +optional
	// +listType=atomic
	Tolerations []Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,22,opt,name=tolerations"`
}

// The ResourceClaim this Toleration is attached to tolerate any taint that matches
// the triple <key,value,effect> using the matching operator <operator>.
type Toleration struct {
	// Key is the taint key that the toleration applies to. Empty means match all taint keys.
	// If the key is empty, operator must be Exists; this combination means to match all values and all keys.
    // Must be a label name.
    //
	// +optional
	Key string

	// Operator represents a key's relationship to the value.
	// Valid operators are Exists and Equal. Defaults to Equal.
	// Exists is equivalent to wildcard for value, so that a ResourceClaim can
	// tolerate all taints of a particular category.
    //
	// +optional
	Operator TolerationOperator

	// Value is the taint value the toleration matches to.
	// If the operator is Exists, the value should be empty, otherwise just a regular string.
    // Must be a label value.
    //
	// +optional

> 	Value string `json:"value,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=value"`

Reviewer 3: What kind of values are expected here?  E.g. `true`  / `false` are longer than 3 bytes...

Author: `3` is the protobuf index number, not the maximum length. Which reminds me, I should remove the struct tags because they don't add value here in the KEP...

The value is whatever the creator of a taint sets as value. The API itself doesn't care as long as it has the form of a Kubernetes label value. What that is exactly isn't defined for node taints ever, so presumably other documentation covers that or its considered common knowledge. It's the same as for labels.

Author: > Which reminds me, I should remove the struct tags because they don't add value here in the KEP...

Fixed, together with tab vs spaces indention.

    // Effect indicates the taint effect to match. Empty means match all taint effects.
    // When specified, allowed values are NoSchedule and NoExecute.
    //
    // +optional
    Effect TaintEffect

    // TolerationSeconds represents the period of time the toleration (which must be
    // of effect NoExecute, otherwise this field is ignored) tolerates the taint. By default,
    // it is not set, which means tolerate the taint forever (do not evict). Zero and
    // negative values will be treated as 0 (evict immediately) by the system.
    //
    // +optional
    TolerationSeconds *int64
}

// A toleration operator is the set of operators that can be used in a toleration.
//
// +enum
type TolerationOperator string

const (
    TolerationOpExists TolerationOperator = "Exists"
    TolerationOpEqual  TolerationOperator = "Equal"
)
```

As with Taint, these structs get duplicated to enable documenting DRA specific
behavior and to ensure that future extensions do not get inherited
accidentally.

Generated conversion code might make it possible to reuse existing helper
code. Alternatively, that code can be copied.

> The DeviceOverride also gets extended. It is possible to use

Author: Fixed.
